---
layout: post
title:  'Monoids'
summary: A practical look at monoids in programming
tags: [category theory, functional programming, composition, extensibility]
permalink: monoids
---

Here's a simple overview of monoids: what they are and how they can be useful in the context of programming. 

**TLDR - Monoids are a mathematical concept. Primarily, they're set of definitions that, if followed, can be used to structure code so that it is mathematically guaranteed(!) to allow composition and extensibility.**

Before diving into what defines a monoid, let's take a quick look at **sets**. This will be key to understanding the usefulness of monoids.

## What are sets? Why is it useful to think in sets?

A `set` (the mathematical concept, not the data-structure) is simply a collection of items that share one or more characteristics. The items of a set are referred to as `element`s of the set. Working with sets is useful: they give you information that you can use to your advantage. Some examples of sets you may notice:

| Example set                     | Characteristics shared by elements of the set    | How could the properties of the set be useful?                                                                 |
| ------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Natural numbers                 | They are all integers greater than 0.            | You can divide any natural number by another natural number and never worry about dividing by 0.               |
| The `User` objects in a program | They represent users that can use the program.   | You know any `User` object you find in the program is guaranteed to have a `getName` method that you can call. |
| Paramedics                      | Recieve standard training in emergency response. | You know you can reach out to one or more of them for help in times of medical emergencies.                    |

In many circumstances, we can go further than identify sets that already exist: **it is possible to *design* sets that have properties we want**.

This is an important, powerful idea. We do it all the time when coding. When we create a class, we are desigining a set of objects that will all follow the same rules. Schemas in databases designs a set of data that is guaranteed to have the same attributes. With classes and databases, we often focus on designing the rules for what elements of the set look like: their fields and methods and how they behave individually. Monoids take it a step further and also design how they behave when you compose them.

## What are monoids?

A monoid is a set of rules we can use to identify or design sets to ensure that the elements of a set can be composed. Specifically we need a `set` **and** a `function` that, together, must obey the rules below.  
For now, let's just understand the rules; we'll go into why the rules are important in the next section.

#### Rule #1) There is a <span class="tooltip" data-tooltip="we call a function that take 2 arguments and produce one output a 'bifunction'">function that takes 2 elements</span> of the set and which produces another element in the set

This is the function that composes elements of the set together. It is called <span class="tooltip" data-tooltip="It doesn't have to be a product - it's just a name">**the monoidal product**</span>; it is often given the symbol **⊗**.

> *e.g. for natural numbers:  
> this works if ⊗ is `add` or `multiply`: they will both always result in a natural number  
> `subract` won't work (we can get negatives) and neither will `divide` (which can result in decimals)*

#### Rule #2) The monoidal product can be applied between elements in any order

> *e.g. for natural numbers:  
> this works if ⊗ is `add` or `multiply`: 1 + (2 + 3) = (1 + 2) + 3 = 6 &nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; (2 * 3) * 3 = 2 * (3 * 3) = 18*

*Mathematically, this kind of behaviour is called "associativity".*

#### Rule #3) There is a special element of the set that "makes the monoidal product passive"

This special element is called the **identity**. If the identity is one of the two arguments of the monoidal product, the monoidal product will always return the _other_ element. 

>   *e.g. for natural numbers  
> if ⊗ is `multiply`: **1** is the identity. Multiplying a number with 1 always leaves the number unchanged.   
6 * 1 = 6   
> if ⊗ is `add`: there is no identity. Although **0** does what we want (0 + 6 = 6), 0 is not a natural number.  
> Because it fails this condition, natural numbers with ⊗ being `add` is **not a monoid***

#### Example monoid 

From the examples in this section, we saw that **the set of natural numbers with ⊗ as `multiply`** is a monoid, because it satisfied every condition.  
Another monoid would be **the set of non-negative integers numbers with ⊗ as `add`** (the identity, 0, is an non-negative integer).

## Why are monoids useful?

To illustrate the power/usefulness of monoids, we'll invent a monoidal set of `ShoppingList` objects where ⊗ is the `and()` operation, which allows us to merge two lists into one.

The exact implementation of code isn't important for this disucssion, what we care about is defining the behaviour:

```typescript
// === our monoidal product must take 2 lists and return a merged list ===
function and(listA: ShoppingList, listB: ShoppingList): ShoppingList { /*...*/ }

// === our monoidal product must be associative ===
and(and(listA, listB), listC) === and(listA, and(listB, listC)) // must be true

// === we need an identity shopping list ===
// we create an identity element and insure that it triggers the behaviour we  want in our product
const identityList: ShoppingList { /*...*/ }  
and(identityList, listA) === listA // must be true
and(listA, identityList) === listA // must be true
```

### Composability 

The main boon that monoids give us is the ability to compose elements of our sets i.e. using small, simple blocks to build up larger, complex systems.

We know that we can combine any two `ShoppingList` objects together using monoidal product and that doing so will give us back an element that is still in the set.

```typescript
const wishlist: ShoppingList = ... 
const groceries: ShoppingList = ... 
const thingsToBuy: ShoppingList = and(groceries, wishlist);
```

This means that we can **chain the result indefinitely**. We can compose any number of shopping lists together. The identity element allows you to get started with one item.

```typescript
// notice how the complex Christmas list is composed of smaller lists
const christmasList: ShoppingList = and(and(and(and(identityList, myWishlist), momWishlist), dadWishlist), sisterWishlist)
```

Lastly, because the product is associative, we can **break up and/or parallelize** the work to compose elements of the set.
This can be important when the monoidal product is expensive; when there a large amount of elements to combine or when the elements are distributed (you have to combine them in different systems).  

```typescript
// in thread #1
const romanticShopping: ShoppingList = and(travelItems, flowersHeLikes) 

// in thread #2
const kidsShopping: ShoppingList = and(toys, schoolSupplies)

// combine the results inthread #3
const thingsToBuy: ShoppingList = and(romanticShopping, kidsShopping) 
```

### Extensibility

The composability that monoids provide is also good for extension. 
New elements can be added without modifying any of the existing elements and new elements are guaranteed to be composable with existing ones.

```typescript
// before
const firstList: ShoppingList = ...
const secondList: ShoppingList = ...

const result = and(firstList, secondList);

// after
const firstList: ShoppingList = ...
const secondList: ShoppingList = ...
const thirdList: ShoppingList = ... // easy to add

const result = and(
  and(firstList, secondList), 
  thirdList // immediately works with other filters
  );
```